PERRYSBURG, Ohio — The transformation of American manufacturing that is unfolding here promises to reshape the nation's economy and its politics, with new solar energy, electric vehicle and semiconductor plants sprouting in faded factory towns.

Talk of industrial revival already is starring in the race for Ohio's open U.S. Senate seat, as both Rep. Tim Ryan, the Democrat, and Republican J.D. Vance seek to embed themselves in the state's comeback narrative.

In interviews, Ryan embraced the Biden administration's use of generous government subsidies to encourage creation of new manufacturing jobs while Vance touted former president Donald Trump's import tariffs and said faster development of the state's energy resources could spark a boom.

“Our goal needs to be: how do we position ourselves to be in front of as many growing industries as possible? Electric vehicles, cars, trucks, batteries … hydrogen, natural gas, nuclear solar, aerospace. How do you lay the groundwork where we have an industrial policy for all of these?" Ryan said. “There's an opportunity for us to dominate these industries of the future."
What's playing out on the ground, though, is different from what the candidates stress on the stump. Yes, manufacturing jobs are growing in Ohio. But they are not the jobs that disappeared decades ago.

Manufacturing has changed so much in recent years that the blue-collar job gains from new factories, while welcome, are likely to pale alongside the 5 million U.S. jobs lost since the late 1990s, economists said. Many of the new positions will require special skills or education that most blue-collar workers lack. Much of the work will be done by machines.

“When we talk about bringing manufacturing back today, that's very different than bringing back manufacturing 10 or 20 or 50 years ago," said Amanda Weinstein, an economics professor at the University of Akron. “It's not going to produce as many jobs."

Biden's American Rescue Plan made inflation worse, but the economy better

The sparsely-populated factory floor at Toledo Solar illustrates the challenge.

The three-year-old manufacturer of solar panels for homes and businesses is exactly the kind of green-energy, high-tech business that the Biden administration favors. Aaron Bates, the chief executive, announced a major expansion last month, boosted by tax incentives in the climate and health bill the president signed in August.

But like many advanced manufacturers, Toledo Solar's growth will create a limited number of new jobs, at least in the near term. On a recent visit, just a handful of workers stood alongside the automated production line.
“This isn't the kind of factory where you just throw bodies at things," Bates said. “It's all robotics."

The White House says manufacturing is booming, thanks to federal investments and the industry's rethinking of supply chain risks, amid the pandemic and the war in Ukraine.

Biden has won passage of three bills designed to promote domestic manufacturing: the Inflation Reduction Act, the bipartisan infrastructure bill, and the CHIPS and Science Act, which subsidizes semiconductor production.

Several leading employers already have responded, including Intel, which broke ground last month on a $20 billion semiconductor complex outside Columbus.

Over the past year, U.S. factories have added 467,000 jobs, marking the sector's best recovery from recession since the 1950s, according to the White House.
 Washington Post)

“This isn't the kind of factory where you just throw bodies at things," Bates said. “It's all robotics."

The White House says manufacturing is booming, thanks to federal investments and the industry's rethinking of supply chain risks, amid the pandemic and the war in Ukraine.

Biden has won passage of three bills designed to promote domestic manufacturing: the Inflation Reduction Act, the bipartisan infrastructure bill, and the CHIPS and Science Act, which subsidizes semiconductor production.

Several leading employers already have responded, including Intel, which broke ground last month on a $20 billion semiconductor complex outside Columbus.

Over the past year, U.S. factories have added 467,000 jobs, marking the sector's best recovery from recession since the 1950s, according to the White House.

Yet hanging onto those gains — let alone building on them — will be tough.

Manufacturing has enjoyed key advantages over the past two years. Unlike face-to-face businesses such as restaurants, most factories could operate safely through the pandemic. And orders surged as consumers used their stimulus checks to buy computers, furniture and appliances.

Those tail winds are fading. In September, the Institute for Supply Management's manufacturing gauge fell to its lowest mark since May 2020 with new orders and employment contracting. Many companies are reducing their head counts through hiring freezes and attrition, ISM said.

As the Federal Reserve and other central banks raise interest rates to fight inflation, Wall Street analysts predict a global slowdown that will weaken factory demand. Higher rates also have lifted the value of the dollar by more than 10 percent since March, which makes U.S. goods more expensive for overseas buyers.

Talk of a manufacturing boom is “more hype than reality," Michael Feroli, an economist for JPMorgan Chase, wrote in a recent client note.